This is a talk that I would not, I'm afraid, have the nerve to give under any other circumstances. It's a story I've been saving up to
tell Viki. Like so many of you here, I've enjoyed from time to time the wonderful experience of exploring with Viki some part of
physics, or anything to which we can apply physics. We wander around strictly as amateurs equipped only with some elementary
physics even if we don't throw much light on the other subjects. Now this is that kind of a subject, but I have still another reason for
wanting to, as it were, needle Viki with it, because I'm going to talk for a while about viscosity. Viscosity in a liquid will be the
dominant theme here and you know Viki's program of explaining everything including the height of mountains, with the elementary
constants. The viscosity of a liquid is a very tough nut to crack, as he well knows, because when the stuff is cooled by merely 40
degrees, its viscosity can change by a factor of a million. I was really amazed by fluid viscosity in the early days of NMR, when it
turned out that glycerin was just what we needed to explore the behavior of spin relaxation. And yet if you were a little bug inside
the glycerin looking around, you wouldn't see much change in your glycerin as it cooled. Viki will say that he can at least predict
the logarithm of the viscosity. And that, of course, is correct because the reason viscosity changes is that it's got one of these
activation energy things and what he can predict is the order of magnitude of the exponent. But it's more mysterious than that, Viki,
because if you look at the Chemical Rubber Handbook table you will find that there is almost no liquid with viscosity much lower
than that of water. The viscosities have a big range but they stop at the same place. I don't understand that. That's what I'm leaving
for him.

Now, I'm going to talk about a world which, as physicists, we
almost never think about. The physicist hears about viscosity in high
school when he's repeating Millikan's oil drop experiment and he
never hears about it again, at least not in what I teach. And
Reynolds's number, of course, is something for the engineers. And
the low Reynolds's number regime most engineers aren't even
interested in--except possibly chemical engineers, in connection
with fluidized beds, a fascinating topic I heard about from a
chemical engineering friend at MIT. But I want to take you into the
world of very low Reynolds number--a world which is inhabited by
the overwhelming majority of the organisms in this room. This
world is quite different form the one that we have developed our
intuitions in.
I might say what got me into this. To introduce something that will
come later, I'm going to talk partly about how microorganisms
swim. That will not, however, turn out to be the only important
question about them. I got into this through the work of a former
colleague of mine at Harvard, Howard Berg. Berg got his Ph.D.
with Norman Ramsey, working on a hydrogen maser, and then he
went back into biology, which had been his early love, and into
cellular physiology. He is now at the University of Colorado at
Boulder, and has recently participated in what seems to me one of
the most astonishing discoveries about the questions we're going to
talk about. So it was partly Howard's work, tracking E. coli and
finding out this strange thing about them, that got me thinking about
this elementary physics stuff.